so about a year ago now i made a video
on this channel about whether black
holes
could contain dark matter and nearly
every question in the comments was
what if it's either way around what if
dark matter is made of black
horse dark matter is matter that we know
is there but we can't see it doesn't
interact with
light in any way or even interact with
other
matter in a normal way either
that suspiciously kind of sounds like
black
holes but this isn't a new idea right
this has been kicking around
for 30 years or so now since the early
90s but this idea has
gained a lot more traction recently as a
viable hypothesis
for to explain dark matter since the
detection
of gravitational waves yeah
this video is going to have pretty much
everything
chalked into it black holes dark matter
gravitational waves
and even the mysterious fast radio
bursts
come into it at the end so let's just
take a deep breath
and dive right into this
so dark matter is matter that we cannot
see
it doesn't interact with light in any
way which is the main way that we
receive information from the world
and the universe around us and we've
talked on this channel before
about the bucket loads of evidence we
have
for dark matter that's built up you know
over the past century it's not
something that's just sprung out of the
ground overnight as an idea to to fudge
things you know everything
from how galaxies rotate to what happens
when galaxies collide to how much
mass we measure must be there in
galaxies compared to
how many stars we can actually see
we know it's there we know it's dark and
we know how it's distributed in the
universe
we just don't know what it's made of i
just wish i knew
now the leading hypothesis right now for
what dark matter is made of is that it
is an
elementary particle that we haven't
discovered yet one of the
fundamental building blocks of the
universe
and these elementary particles have been
dubbed wimps
weakly interacting massive particles
because well they
don't interact the same way that normal
elementary particles do
with light so that we can detect them
now about 10 years ago you probably
would have heard any particle physicists
confidently state that well as soon as
the large hadron collider
is turned on at cern this huge big
particle accelerator
we will have evidence for a particle
that can explain dark matter
now sure the large hadron collider found
evidence for the higgs boson which we
talked before about on this channel
but it hasn't found any evidence for a
particle that can explain
dark matter that's left particle
physicists with experiments that search
for incredibly rare collisions between
normal matter particles
and dark matter particles in sort of
supercooled fluids
underground in these huge big mines
but those experiments haven't yielded
any results yet
either now a lack of evidence
doesn't necessarily always mean evidence
against
but it has got people thinking what if
dark matter could be explained
by something else it's particularly
brought people back to the idea
of not wimps but machos
massive compact halo objects i.e
objects that don't shine that are dark
they're just
hanging around the galaxy unbeknownst to
us so
anything from black holes to neutron
stars to even
rogue planets that aren't orbiting a
star
anymore now we can tell when one of
those objects is there
if it passes in front of something that
does shine that's in the background
the dark object acts as a lens it bends
space around it to focus the light from
a background
star essentially that does is it briefly
brightens
that background star from our
perspective
we call these events micro lensing
events and if we compare the rate at
which we see these micro lensing events
happen to the way we think stars are
distributed in our galaxy and the way
that we think the macros these dark
objects are also distributed
that would give us sort of a predicted
rate
the rate that we see them at actually
falls sure of the predicted rate and
actually the rate that we see them at
would only account for 20
of all the dark matter that we think has
to be there
that was done way back in the 90s which
is
why the idea of machos is dark matter
fell out of favor quite quickly with
people when they realized that it just
wouldn't account
for all of the dark matter that we know
has to be there
but since there hasn't been any
detection of any elementary wimp
particle in the meantime people have now
begun to revisit the idea
especially since 2015
when the ligo team announced the
detection of gravitational waves almost
a hundred
years after einstein first predicted
them
in his theory of general relativity
general relativity is
a theory or a description of what
gravity is like it essentially says that
any massive
object bends space around them and so
any object or light moving around that
object will travel along
curved space and therefore take a curved
path this is how we get
orbits and these lensing events as well
now you can imagine that if two
massive objects are actually orbiting
around each other
then the amount that space is bent is
going to change
with time producing ripples that then
travel
outwards from those two objects through
space
and this is what was detected by the
ligo collaboration back in 2015
and that collaboration was over a
thousand
people strong and all a thousand of them
were shocked when they first
saw that detection because it almost
perfectly
fit with a model of what general
relativity would predict
for two merging black holes and the
collaboration spent
months trying to explain that signal in
any other way see if there was
any other explanation for it before they
announced it to the world and said
what we have detected has got to be
two merging black holes where the
surprise came from with this detection
was how heavy the black holes were that
have merged
they were both around about 30 times the
mass of the sun
and the question was how in the universe
did two black holes
30 times heavier than the sun end up
orbiting
around each other okay that makes no
sense
now most black holes in the milky way
except the supermassive black hole in
the center
are thought to form at the end of a
star's life when a star goes supernova
so something that's at least
20 times heavier than the sun when it
runs
out of hydrogen gas i.e it's fuel
for nuclear fusion in its central core
regions where it's actually hot enough
for nuclear fusion to happen
then the star will rebound outwards in a
supernova
throwing like the majority of its outer
layers out whilst that core
collapses back down under its own
gravity
into a black hole somewhere around you
know one to
three-ish times the mass of the sun
depending on how big the star was before
it went
supernovae to a much bigger star will
produce a much bigger black hole
at the end now the sun is actually a
rarity in our galaxy the milky way in
that it is
a solo star in the center of the solar
system
85 of star systems in our galaxy
are made of two stars or even more so
something we call a binary system when
there's two stars
orbiting around each other so if you've
got a binary system of
two massive stars you know more than 20
times
the mass of the sun then you're going to
end up with a
binary black hole system at the end
after those two stars
have run out of fuel and gone supernova
but the black holes that have been
formed will be again like one to three
times the mass of the sun
and not 30 times the mass of the sun
like what ligo detected in fact the
average mass of the black holes that
ligo has been finding merging together
is about
26 times the mass of the sun so this
surprise at the ligo result was due to
two things right it was firstly due to
the fact that no one had considered
these mass ranges of black holes before
and second because
no one really had any explanation for
how these black holes
could have formed okay maybe you could
have had
previous mergers of black holes that
would have grown them and maybe they
decreated a little bit more matter
over the billions of years maybe you
could have had
some specific system of five stars that
became
two black holes in the end you could
explain maybe one
system in that way but not you know more
than ten that ligo have now
detected now because these black holes
detected by ligo were
so much larger than anyone had
considered when thinking about
machos back in the 90s that's why this
idea of
these black holes is dark matter was
revisited here
now we could just speculate away on the
internet right about whether black holes
are made of dark matter but what we need
to make this a viable scientific
hypothesis
is some sort of test that we can do
and the ligo detection gave people just
that now after just a few months of the
announcement of the detection of
gravitational waves by the ligo team
two separate research teams published
papers
with a similar experiment they said that
if you assume that dark matter is made
of black holes
and they are distributed to give us the
distribution that we know dark matter
has to have in the universe
then how often would you expect them to
encounter each other at a close enough
distance that they will eventually end
up spiraling around each other
and merging if you do that you get a
number that's
around about three per year
per giga per sec cube that's a volume of
space quite a large
volume of space now that number is
heavily dependent on what assumptions
you make in terms of what mass the black
holes are
what the local density of those black
holes you have rather than sort of the
global density is
as well but even changing those
parameters you can see in this part
there's many different
model lines there but they all fall into
that
shaded purple region that purple region
is the merger rate
estimated by the ligo team for how many
similar things
that they should detect which is between
two to 54 per year per giga per sec
cubed now the fact that these two rates
were very
similar very coincident with each other
is what had people
questioning whether what ligo had
detected
was the black holes that make up dark
matter
now obviously that didn't explain still
where the black holes of the actual mass
actually came from but the leading
hypothesis to explain that is that they
are
primordial black holes i.e they formed
in the very
early universe not from sort of
gravitational collapse of
stars down but from these tiny quantum
fluctuations in the early universe
that meant that you know there was
slightly more particles in this area of
the universe than that area of the
universe and where there was more
particles
it just so happened that you created
this tiny object that
you know you would need to escape
velocity greater than the speed of light
to escape
a black hole now their existence was
first proposed by zeldovich and novokov
back in 1966 and then stephen hawking
came along and did the maths behind them
in 1971
showing that they could be as small as
you know 10
nanograms but could be as large as tens
of millions of trillions of trillions of
kilograms i.e
tens of times the mass of the sun so
there are now theoretical
astrophysicists that believe that
primordial black holes could be a viable
hypothesis
to explain dark matter
but there's always
a but there is probably a bucket load
more evidence against primordial black
holes being dark matter
than there is for it from these
coincident
rates and the masses that ligo just
happens to be detecting
if you have these primordial black holes
forming in the early universe they're
obviously going to leave an imprint
on the early universe and on the
universe that we see today so for
example one of the big
pieces of evidence against them is the
cosmic microwave background
that echo of the big bang from the early
universe it rules out the presence of
so many massive primordial black holes
because of the effect that they would
have had on it that we
don't see even the fact that dwarf
galaxies exist
at all pretty much rules out the
presence of such massive
primordial black holes because the
presence of so many of them
in a dwarf galaxy would have completely
disrupted the orbits of the stars and
basically just sort of
poofed out the galaxy and dispersed them
across the universe
also if that many primordial black holes
existed especially in the centers of
galaxies where we think dark matter is
at a quite
high concentration there's also a lot of
gas there as well so those black holes
would start accreting
that gas and feeding on it and when that
happens gas heats
up it gets excited and it starts glowing
in x-rays and
we don't see a lot of little points of
x-rays towards the centers
of galaxies or the center of our own
galaxy when we look so this gives us a
situation where the majority of
astrophysicists
myself included you know look at all
this evidence against primordial black
holes in dark matter and therefore still
prefer
the hypothesis that dark matter is made
of an elementary
fundamental particle which handily
shifts the onus of responsibility
to figuring out what dark matter is to
the particle physicists
but those astrophysicists that are still
in favor of the primordial black holes
as
dark matter hypothesis have come up with
you know one more test that they can do
before
they let the hypothesis go and that
is using fast radio bursts
these are these incredibly bright
millisecond bursts of radio waves coming
from
other galaxies in space and as yet
what's producing these signals is
unexplained although if you see my night
sky news
from may a couple of months ago you will
know that perhaps
there's some evidence that it could be
magnetized but as of yet
still no consensus as to what's causing
fast radio bursts
but despite not knowing you know what
they are yet they still provide us with
a very
useful test now if a primordial black
hole
got in the way of the signal from one of
these fast radio bursts from
another galaxy in space making its way
across
intergalactic space to us then that
primordial black hole would once again
act as a lens because it would bend the
space and therefore the signal
would get bent around the black hole in
fact take
two different paths around the black
hole one that was
slightly longer than the other and what
this would create in the signal that we
would actually detect
is a slightly fainter echo
of the fast radio bursts a short time
afterwards as long as the primordial
black hole was large enough to do that
around about 30 times
the mass of the sun now to test this we
need a
large sample of fast radio bursts but at
the minute
we know of around 40 or so sources of
fast
radio bursts which is nowhere near a
large enough sample
to do this within to get good statistics
with however the chime telescope in
canada is now
actively surveying the sky littening out
for these fast radio bursts every single
night now the hope is that within a
decade or so we should have about a
thousand or so of these fast radio burst
detections and a thousand
is a sample we can definitely do
statistics with
and if dark matter does turn out to be
made of primordial black holes at about
30 times the mass of the sun on average
then we
should see about 10 of those
a thousand fast radio bursts having one
of these
faint echoes
but that's not for another 10 years or
so we have another waiting game just
like the search with elementary
fundamental particles these
wimps and once again this search might
not turn up anything either
now i know a lot of people
don't like waiting but for me it's
the anticipation from waiting
that'll make that result you know
whatever it might be
all the more exciting when we finally
have it but those experiments haven't
found it
haven't found it now the leading
hypothesis for this is that they're made
of primordial black hole
prime ordeal
they've they've really gone through an
ordeal they're just they've come through
a terrible ordeal
wondering what is dark matter
[Music]
even if we're just primordial black
holes